And you say, seven years ago you brought a facsimile of this, never expecting that you'd get the actual copy.
This is an actual copy.
It is not as good condition as the Bible, but beggars can't be choosers.
And nobody else had it in this country.
And this is something you acquired?
Yes, I got it in 1971.
There.
Now, you can see how the initials are reversed in color.
Otherwise, it's pretty much the same.
This is trimmed, obviously, a little bit.
Is that trimmed?
Oh, of course, yes, yes, there's no doubt about it.
It's trimmed very radically.
It's bound by the Nouvelle-Élysée-Nassonale in about 1820 or something like that, I suppose.
The Nouvelle-Élysée-Nassonale found it.
Oh, I think that's an early 19th century French finding.
I could imagine.
It's probably possible.
Now, wait a minute.
We have to.
Could you open that?
There's a guide there, the pages I'm supposed to show.
The trick is that your pages are different from the two copies, and that can be done.
From the facsimile?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Now, let's see.
Well, the facsimile is from... You could do me a favor if you move over there.
Okay.
Yes, sir.
You turn these pages to 3D.
That's right.
It's quite a nice facsimile, isn't it?
It's a very nice facsimile.
Well, how about that?
Can you find it?
What that means is that this sort of stuff is directions for certain usages in different places, and probably places around Mainz, I suppose, that they were familiar with.
And then somebody had the idea, well, listen, if you do that, you won't be able to sell it to anybody else.
You just leave that blank and make it put in whatever they want to.
And so they did.
They printed two versions of it.
And what mostly happened is when somebody bought one of those versions, they then put in their—wrote in there.
And all the British copies in the British Library and Winter Castle and Rylance Library
have writing in places like that.
I see.
It's pretty much the same sort of thing.
But this is the print.
And this type, this is a small solar type, is probably the oldest one of the types, because it doesn't have as many different abutting forms.
Look, well, this CI in the first page here, where it says up there,
That eye runs in the sea awkwardly, in a wrong kind of way, and they're having trouble with it.
What is that stuff up there that we don't have here?
That's music, that's it.
That's written in.
This is before they actually figured out how to print music, I think.
There was no music printing in 1457, no.
But this type shows features
that suggests that it may be earlier.
It's the same type as in the Morgan's Conscience Missile.
It finally wasn't printed until about 1472, according to Watermark.
But the type may be very old, and it may be older than not only the 42-line type, but even the 36-line type.
Really?
Mm-hmm.
I have a feeling that that's the oldest one.
Now, where did you find this property?
Well, Mr. Kraus did a bargaining job with Bibliothic National.
Did Bibliothic National let this go?
Let this go, yes.
And Mr. Halbren, Gabe Austin's father-in-law, the book dealer in Paris, said, oh, did I hear you about that?
I thought to myself,
Another Trafalgar, another Waterloo.
But when I saw the manuscripts we got in exchange for, he said, oh, it's not so bad after all.
So you made a little deal then?
You made a little... Not with Mr. Krause.
So he was the broker, so that's true.
Well, he got it before he had any idea who he was going to store it, too.
It lay around in shop for over a year.
Amazing.
Yeah, but he traded something that he had in general stock with them for this?
Whether he had it in general stock, I cannot say.
Do you know what the manuscripts were?
No.
Nicholas Parker's written that all up, and also it's in his book, his autobiography, as well.
I see.
I forgot what the manuscripts were.
The book's here, you know.
Okay, Crouse.
Now, the next page.
Let's try 15A.
That's quite a thing that Crouse pulled out.
You couldn't do that today, could you, I don't think.
Oh, I haven't heard about it.
Oh, yeah, 15A.
15, or 16A.
Yeah, she allowed a...
I think that's just a drop of wine, a drop of word, or what?
Yeah, it wasn't there.
I don't know.
Maybe the word fell out of it.
Maybe it's excellent.
That happens.
It's definitely art.
It's there, there, and not there.
That's absolutely correct.
Is it identical as the rest of the page?
I think so.
Something in 6A.
I'm sorry.
I didn't see it.
I kept finding new things.
I didn't write them in.
Where is 6A?
I'll tell 6A when I see one.
Yes.
Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes.
This is all I think.
This is 6A.
There, I think.
Oh, yeah.
That's right.
You see, this is wrong, and somebody's corrected it.
All right.
Now, let's go to 19B.
So which one would this have been copied from, or is this a collation, do you think?
No, this would have been copied in Austria, in Vienna, the Austrian National Library.
I've seen the original there.
19B, I think it is.
It should be right.
It's 19B.
Good.
Now, we're looking at, try that there.
Oh, that's inverted, isn't it?
It's a U, see, look.
Monified Latin word.
So, that's right, and this is wrong.
That statement is correct.
It's wonderful, huh?
Very nice to eat.
You found these?
No, there's a book about it that mentions these things, most of them anyway.
And I read the book.
The rest of them had lots of fun just going in.
Oh, sure, you bet.
I had a lot of fun in this book.
This is my favorite book, actually.
My next one is... It's your favorite book, why would you say?
In the library.
Why, though?
Well, it's a majestic, wonderful book.
There's no other copy in this country.
It's the first book that has a complete copy.
It has a beat in it.
And you got it, too.
You're the one who found it.
No, I would have bought it anyway.
I won't go for your next.
27B.
Let's try 27.
Let's do 24.
Come on.
Oh, God, I'm going to stop this in.
Tell me when, by the way.
I can't remember now.
Here.
Oh, yeah.
This is a funny one.
Now, you put your finger on those two places.
That one and the other one.
Down here.
See, they're reversed, if you look very carefully.
And the Dez Deos?
The Dominicus and the Periatis and so on.
That should be down here.
Which is correct, do you think?
I think it's this one, because
Here's two of them in a row, and somebody said that you shouldn't have them in a row.
They should automate.
And if the pattern has been consistent, this book has been corrected.
In other words... No, that's not entirely... Did this one have the I turned into an A?
Yes, it did.
When do you think of... Which of these do you think is earlier?
Well, different pages, of course, could have... You see, that's the problem.
I was going to try and make the case that this one was later and therefore corrected, but you can't...
Always say that.
Because we're just here.
Now, look, for example, here.
See this.
Solvum fac and fiat pox, I think it is.
Oh, no, it isn't.
No, it's fiat media accordia and sacerdotes.
Yes, all right.
Keep your eye on that.
You tell you're getting into suspicious, shiny territory when he starts to number things like this.
Oh, yeah, that's right.
All right, but you're noticing that.
All right, now notice over here.
See, there's a correction there.
They tried to make a turn to turn them around.
I can actually see that there's been some business going on there.
Sure, they've been trying to correct it.
Yeah.
Now, you see what the poor printers had to do, between every copy, they'd have to take out every one of these letters and put them back in.
Once in a while, they'd get them in the wrong order.
And they got these two in the wrong order.
I wouldn't blame them, I bet.
This is...
That's a vellum copy.
Vellum, yes.
Oh, yes.
So is that, but not the facsimile, the original.
Now, where is it?
All right.
It's 28.
This is 28.
Is that all his head ready?
And now, over here, there's something funny, too.
Not in this copy.
Up here, you see, it says, Sani et salvi et libri.
cleanse and heal and free.
Then down here, it says, it says, salva nos ad uva nos.
A couple of noses.
Look over here, see?
Sani salvi et liberi.
Salva ad ad uva nos.
They had dropped red there.
Yeah, they reached it.
They just turned out.
Well, do you think they did it?
Or do you think it could have dropped out in tight?
Well, I think it's been removed.
Pretty good job.
But how is it correct?
Is it correct like that or is it correct like that?
Well, it's the same text.
You see the same format.
There's just enough room for it.
You know what I mean?
Texturally, which is correct?
Yeah, but then you can... It's what Abbott likes against another Abbott.
It's one prison opinion against somebody else's, I suppose.
That was the wrong question.
Now, the British Library copy has many of those things.
The Library of Congress does not have one of these.
No, they're in this country, as I told you.
Okay.
Morgan doesn't have one.
Huntington doesn't have one.
Not even Houghton.
Not even.
Yeah, those are him writing in there.
So, obviously, there was a—
He's going through.
I mean, one thing that he does, and I've learned this, is when somebody writes something about something like Paul Needham or whoever wrote this thing on the phone, he goes through and compares his copy to what they say in the article and checks all of them.
I mean, Paul Needham on where things happen in the Gutenberg spot immediately brings in the article and goes to the pages and finds it, and that's what's going on.
And that's so he can find them again when he...
Try to, anyway.
I think 34B.
34B.
Where's 34?
There's a small one here.
And then there'll be a good one.
I've known I'm him.
See it?
That's a different set.
All right, now we get a good one.
41A.
Look at this.
Somebody here.
Yeah, that's right.
See, it's worn out, maybe replaced it.
This was done again by the bibliotech.
No, this would have been done by the monks in Mainz.
See, look at this, for example.
Probably the 18th century.
All right.
The other pages are in better shape.
See, that page isn't too bad now.
Here, this is, come on, 41A.
This is a good page.
There's a lot of nice things here.
Now, look at here, for example, see?
These two words I'm pointing at.
And see what happens after it.
Now take it over here.
See how it throws everything on the next line?
So it all has to be reset.
Definitely.
Of course, they weren't too concerned about justification here, were they?
No, no.
Well, that isn't too bad with the hyphen there.
But it's not as good as the Bible.
There's no question about that.
Now, but you can see that's a major affair they had to deal with.
But this abbreviation there makes it able to come out okay, finally.
Now then there are other things also.
Look, for example, the first one is up here, yes.
Look at DABO.
See?
Ligatures versus separate letters.
There's a ligature for D-A, there's a ligature for B-O.
Well, who would have picked that up?
They look pretty close to me, to tell you the truth, the damos.
Well, they can't, yeah.
No, B-O is definitely off.
But who would have found that?
In other words, somebody has actually checked these word for word.
Oh, sure.
Well, Masson certainly did that.
Then what's, now, oh, this is a joke right here.
You see, the U fell upside down, fell up, put it upside down there.
Yeah.
Equins, the horse.
to give you a totally different word.
A non-word.
You have to have a U after a cue to get started with anything.
You can't have a consonant after a U. And then what else?
There's something that's the matter in this line.
F. F. Oh, yes, F. Let's see.
Let's see.
There's no idea.
There's a difference there.
And then there's also omnes, you see there.
So that's the next page.
There's a lot of good stuff there.
Then on page 45, this is one of my favorite phenomena.
Well, the thing they had, you know, I'll have to stop pretty soon.
Okay, you can stop this by the way.
Alas, this is too bad.
Have a nice time.
Well, you see, this canum, for example, see, they have to file these letters down to fit underneath the initials.
See, there's an honest-to-God F, and there's a file down there.
And also, there's the I after a T, where a T bangs into an I, they have a special, here, this kind of I. You see, an ordinary I, oh, that's a good one.
The ordinary eye, there, has something going out the left at the top, but you can't have it when their teeth come banging into an e. That's an abutting form.
Well, but you see there was all this filing going on, and some guy didn't like it very well.
And there was a verse coming up where it says, he will mash his teeth at him.
And Salvejra got ready for that.
And it comes up over here.
Svidebit super aim dendibus suis.
with his teeth, his teeth, and so look at the teeth in that eye.
Teeth.
There you can see his file.
There's teeth in it, in that eye, so you have to look at it.
And, uh, showing there.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, same thing there.
And, uh, uh, I'll give you some, I was putting teeth in the solder, I call it.
That's your favorite item in the whole collection, I think you said.
This book, yeah.
Yeah.
Well, then we skip a lot of stuff there, and there's a nice page, you know, the big, fine initials, printed initials.
Here, for example, here's the letter that doesn't fit, you see, this F. And if that super hadn't stopped there, I don't know what they would have done.
There isn't any room for it.
And that's the only F they have in here.
Then, you see, these are nice pages.
It's very good.
At the Exhibit in New York, there's neither the one.
My father had a fragment of one page.
It was 72, which is right over here.
Yeah, here's that page.
This is the one.
That's right.
That way.
And it's conjugated towards the end of the gathering.
Are there any, are there any, I know you have to go, but are there any items that you really, that have alluded to, that you'd really love to have?
Well, I'd be glad to have a bass-on book.
I wouldn't have fixed that.
Now, here's this page.
This is a very curious page.
There's four on this side and four on that side, see?
And in particular, when you have, for example, two of the same letters, you certainly do there, you take them out and you have to re-ink them, you see, and make it different colors.
And this, the A ordinarily has a lot of ornament around it, but they
And it would get tangled up with the ornament at the end of the tail of the pea, so they took the ornament off the A. But even that wasn't good enough, and I want to show you what happens over here.
Of course, here come the saints marching in, and that's a nice place.
Yeah.
What is this book doing, by the way, on the web page?
It's a psalter.
Here's the first page.
Now, come over to the second page.
Remember, there's too much collision still there.
So look what they did.
This is the way we often exhibit the thing.
They took it out of the ornament.
No ornament at all.
You see, it's a nice way to exhibit it like that, you see.
So you can see the two together.
Well, there's no question about it.
It's dramatically different.
That's an interesting piece of technology.
I wonder who did this facsimile must have been quite a job, too.
Yeah, that's great.
That's a good job, yeah.
Well, yeah.
Okay.
I'll show you one more book, and then I want to check and know.
Why do you go out of 530?
Pilots.
I'm just going to go.
You said that's a problem.
Bill's getting into trouble with Dr. Wood.
Why didn't you go back to that one?
Sir?
Oh, yes, sir.
Yes, sir.
Bill, I got a sense that you know this collection.
Almost as good as Mr. Shady's.
No way.
Here's Dr. Rosenbach now bowing down in homage.
He's here.
Pastor Lee Rosenbach.
He signed it, November 28th, 1925.
All right, what is he boasting about?
Or what is he rejoicing about, or whatever it is, whatever one does.
This is supposedly the best copy there is of this.
The Pilgrim's Progress from this world to that which is to come.
Yeah, all right, this is 1678.
And you see, it's a very nice, nice copy.
It is a perfect copy.
It's a very nice copy.
It's very clean and nice.
And we took this over for exhibit at the Preen, the Mind of Man, the thing that Nicholas Parker was writing about.
I showed this to Howard Nixon at that time, the binding man who knows more about bindings than anybody I ever met.
And he said, I've never seen a book of this type in such condition.
And they never opened it.
And I had to tell the director of the British Museum, I said, we didn't make it into cigar box.
We used x-rays to determine it, he said.
That was acquired from the doctor.
My father got this, you know, when the doctor wasn't around, he had the right to go into, he had the privilege going into his vault.
And when the doctor really went in there and bought it from his assistant, Rosenbach's postion was very mad to come back and found it.
And so... We've been working, there's a copy coming up at Bradley Martin's.
That's exquisite.
But that's a treasure.
And Dr. Rosenbach was
adding leaves and we're supposed to expose them in an article.
Really?
Is that right?
Yeah.
Are you going to publish this?
Paul, Liam and I and Leslie Warren.
Leslie is very nice.
Yeah.
I hope I can talk to you again, sir.
Oh, I hope.
We're very excited about you.
Thank you.
In fact, the next time I come down, if I make
Come again, I'd like to.
The only favor I would ask of you before you leave, would you please sign him up?
I did.
I signed on the way in.
One, two, three, four.
Bye.